Added section on by-table semantics (#1345)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/queries/composed-queries/sequential-queries.adoc

:table-caption!:
:page-role: new-2025.06

`NEXT` allows for linear composition of queries into a sequence of smaller, self-contained segments, passing the whole table of intermediate results from one segment to the next.

`NEXT` has the following benefits:

* `NEXT` can improve the modularity and readability of complex queries.
* `NEXT` can be used instead of xref:clauses/with.adoc[] clause to construct complex queries.
* `NEXT` can improve the usability of xref:queries/composed-queries/conditional-queries.adoc[].

> * `NEXT` allows for passing the full table of intermediate results into the arms of xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[].

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `NEXT` allows for passing the full table of intermediate results to a xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[`UNION`] clause.
```

Reviewer 2: Maybe just: "...results to a `xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[`UNION`] clause". (i.e. get rid of the poetic "into the arms" 😄 )

Reviewer 2: If I understand it correctly, the below sections marked as new in 2025.08 are not new to this release (e.g. you could have NEXT interact with CALL in 2025.07), and I am not understanding from this update how it impacts users?  If it is just an under-the-hood update, then I think it is fine to only make a small mention of it. E.g. 
"As of Neo4j 2025.08,... Previously, ...."

If this makes a meaningful change to how NEXT queries work in 2025.06 and 2025.07, then we should have an example to the effect of "NEXT used to work like this: Now it works like that:..."

Reviewer: double-checking the queries in the old version, at least this one (NEXT inside CALL) behaves differently (yielding 100% for all products):

```
MATCH (p:Product) WHERE p.name <> "Coffee"
CALL (p) {
    MATCH (p)<-[:BUYS]-(c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(otherProduct)
    RETURN c, otherProduct
    NEXT
    RETURN count(DISTINCT c) AS customers, 0 AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee
    UNION
    FILTER otherProduct.name = "Coffee"
    RETURN 0 as customers, count(DISTINCT c) AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee
    NEXT
    RETURN max(customers) AS customers, max(customersAlsoBuyingCoffee) AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee
}
RETURN p.name AS product,
       round(toFloat(customersAlsoBuyingCoffee) * 100 / customers, 1) AS percentageOfCustomersAlsoBuyingCoffee
  ORDER BY product
```

Reviewer 3: If there is aggregation in CALL the previous implementation was wrong, so they errored in the last release. Now they are implemented correctly. In that sense it is new.

Reviewer 3: The same for aggregation in a UNION.

`NEXT` has the following benefits:

* `NEXT` can improve the modularity and readability of complex queries.

> * `NEXT` can be used instead of xref:clauses/with.adoc[] clause to construct complex queries.

Reviewer: does it no longer offer an alternative to call-subqueries?

Reviewer 3: No, not a one-to-one alternative. There is a difference in the semantics. Certain queries can be written with NEXT and CALL alike but not every query.

> * `NEXT` can improve the usability of xref:queries/composed-queries/conditional-queries.adoc[conditional `WHEN`]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `NEXT` can improve the usability of xref:queries/composed-queries/conditional-queries.adoc[conditional `WHEN`].
```

> * `NEXT` allows for passing the full working table into xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[combined `UNION`] queries.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure we are using the term "working table" in the docs at all. "driving table" is more traditional Neo4j lingo. But even that is probably not used in docs. For instance, [here](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/queries/basic/#clause-composition-note) and [here](https://neo4j.com/docs/cypher-manual/current/clauses/clause-composition/) is says "table of intermediate results". So maybe that is what it should say here to:

```suggestion
* `NEXT` allows for passing the full table of intermediate results into xref:queries/composed-queries/combined-queries.adoc[combined `UNION`] queries.
```

[[passing-values]]
== Passing values to subsequent queries

`NEXT` passes the result table of a query to the subsequent query.
In the following example, `NEXT` passes the variable `customer` to the second query:

.Passing a variable to another query via `NEXT`

> tag::sequential_queries_basic_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::sequential_queries_basic_example[]
```

MATCH (customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})  
RETURN customer.firstName AS chocolateCustomer 
----

> end::sequential_queries_basic_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// end::sequential_queries_basic_example[]
```

1+d|Rows: 3
|===

.Passing multiple variables to another query via `NEXT`

> // tag::sequential_queries_basic_example[]

Reviewer: these should probably stay (used for cypher cheat sheet includes)

Reviewer 3: Ah.. okay. I didn't know that.

Reviewer 3: I have add tags again, but on a newly made selection of three queries.

For example, `RETURN 1` and `RETURN 1 + 1` cannot precede `NEXT`, but `RETURN 1 AS one` and `RETURN 1 + 1 AS two` can.
====

Variables which are local to the query preceding `NEXT` and which are not explicitly returned as part of the result of that query are not accessible by subsequent queries in the context of `NEXT`.
This allows you to control variable scope similarly to what you can do with `WITH`, see xref:clauses/with.adoc#variable-scope[Control variables in scope].

[[aggregation-after-next]]
== Aggregation after `NEXT`

`NEXT` passes the result table as a whole to the subsequent query.

> This particularly useful when aggregating values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is particularly useful when aggregating values.
```

In the following example, `NEXT` passes the variable `customer` to the second query:

.Aggregation after `NEXT`
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
RETURN c AS customer, p AS product

NEXT

RETURN product.name AS product,
       COUNT(customer) AS numberOfCustomers
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| product | numberOfCustomers

| "Laptop"    | 4
| "Chocolate" | 3
| "Headphones"| 3
| "Coffee"    | 3
| "Phone"     | 1

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

[[next-and-union]]
== Interactions with `UNION` queries

[[union-after-next]]
=== Using `UNION` after `NEXT`

> When a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` the full table of intermediate results are passed into all arms of the `UNION` query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` the full table of intermediate results is passed into all arms of the `UNION` query.
```

.`UNION` after `NEXT`
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
RETURN c, p

NEXT

RETURN c.firstName AS name, COLLECT(p.price * c.discount) AS purchases, "discounted price" AS type
UNION
RETURN c.firstName AS name, COLLECT(p.price) AS purchases, "real price" AS type

NEXT

RETURN * ORDER BY name, type
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="3*<m"]
|===
| name   | purchases          | type

| "Amir"   | [100.0, 0.5]       | discounted price
| "Amir"   | [1000, 5]          | real price
| "Hannah" | [37.5, 1.5]        | discounted price
| "Hannah" | [250, 10]          | real price
| "Keisha" | [50.0]             | discounted price
| "Keisha" | [250]              | real price
| "Leila"  | [100.0]            | discounted price
| "Leila"  | [1000]             | real price
| "Mateo"  | [50.0, 0.25, 0.5]  | discounted price
| "Mateo"  | [1000, 5, 10]      | real price
| "Niko"   | [125.0, 62.5, 2.5] | discounted price
| "Niko"   | [500, 250, 10]     | real price
| "Yusuf"  | [100.0, 0.5]       | discounted price
| "Yusuf"  | [1000, 5]          | real price

3+d|Rows: 14
|===

[[union-before-next]]
=== Using `UNION` before `NEXT`

> When a `UNION` query precedes a `NEXT` the full result of the `UNION` is passed into the subsequent query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `UNION` query precedes a `NEXT` the full result of the `UNION` is passed to the subsequent query.
```

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

In this example, the list of customer names from the first segment has a duplicate entry for "Mateo" who bought both a laptop and coffee.
The use of `UNION ALL` added him to the list twice.
The second segment can access the list, because both parts of the `UNION` return a part of the list, aliased as `customer`.
By using xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[`count()`], the list aggregates the duplicate in the `RETURN` part of the query.

[[next-inside-union]]
=== `NEXT` inside a `UNION` using `{}`

If a `UNION` query has a `NEXT` in any of its blocks, it is necessary to wrap that block with `{}`.

.`NEXT` inside `UNION`
[source,cypher]
----
{
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer.firstName AS plantCustomer
}

UNION ALL

{
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Coffee'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer.firstName AS plantCustomer
}
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| plantCustomer

| "Amir"
| "Mateo"
| "Yusuf"
| "Mateo"
| "Hannah"
| "Niko"

1+d|Rows: 6
|===

[[next-and-call]]
== Interactions with `CALL` subqueries

> `CALL` subqueries pass the table of intermediate rules to the subquery row-by-row, while `NEXT` passes the table as a whole.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
`CALL` subqueries pass the table of intermediate results to the subquery row by row, while `NEXT` passes the table as a whole.
```

> When `NEXT` is wrapped within a `CALL` subquery, the first query gets passed only a single row at a time.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If `NEXT` is wrapped in a `CALL` subquery, the results of the preceding query is passed to `NEXT` a single row at a time.
```

Reviewer 3: Slight correction on your suggestion, since the grammatical number seems not to fit:

```suggestion
If `NEXT` is wrapped in a `CALL` subquery, the result of the preceding query is passed to `NEXT` a single row at a time.
```

This can be used to compute more complex aggregates in groups.

.`NEXT` inside `CALL`
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (p:Product) WHERE p.name <> "Coffee"
CALL (p) {
    MATCH (p)<-[:BUYS]-(c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(otherProduct)
    RETURN c, otherProduct

    NEXT

    RETURN count(DISTINCT c) AS customers, 0 AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee
    UNION
    FILTER otherProduct.name = "Coffee"
    RETURN 0 as customers, count(DISTINCT c) AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee

    NEXT

    RETURN max(customers) AS customers, max(customersAlsoBuyingCoffee) AS customersAlsoBuyingCoffee
}
RETURN p.name AS product,
       round(toFloat(customersAlsoBuyingCoffee) * 100 / customers, 1) AS percentageOfCustomersAlsoBuyingCoffee
  ORDER BY product
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| product      | percentageOfCustomersAlsoBuyingCoffee

| "Chocolate"  | 33.3
| "Headphones" | 100.0
| "Laptop"     | 33.3
| "Phone"      | 100.0
2+d|Rows: 5
|===

> In this example, we compute for each non-coffee product the percentage of customers that also bought coffee.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This example computes the percentage of customers that also bought coffee for each non-coffee product.
```

> So for each product `p`, the subquery find all pairs of a customer `c` of product `p` and another product `otherProduct` that customer has also bought.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For each product `p` the subquery finds all pairs of a customer `c` of product `p` and another product `otherProduct` which the customer has also bought.
```

Reviewer 3: I do not know which rules for which vs. that and which comma rules the docs team run by and I do not mean to argue with them. 

Just pointing out as an surprise on my part: I would either write 

- "another product `otherProduct` that the customer has also bought" where the subclause is restrictive to "another product" or
- "another product `otherProduct`, which the customer has also bought" where the subclause is nonrestrictive (ie. informative) to "another product".

(like described here: https://www.grammarly.com/blog/grammar/which-vs-that/)

I lean towards it being a restrictive subclause. If you leave the subclause off, then "another product" could be any other product, which includes more than just other products the customer has also bought. In other words, the subclause is not just an informative add-on, which could be remove without loss of meaning.

Anyway, if you affirm that your suggestion is what is should be, then I am happy to accept it.

The first `NEXT` passes these pairs as a whole into a `UNION`, so that the query can
(1) count all customers in the first arm of the union and

> (2) count the customers who also bought coffee in the second arm of the union.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The first `NEXT` passes these pairs as a whole into a `UNION`, so that the query can:

. count all customers in the first arm of the union.
. count the customers who also bought coffee in the second arm of the union.

```
(enumeration syntax in adoc, hopefully correct :D)

> The `UNION` produce two rows -- one from each arm.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `UNION` produces two rows -- one from each arm.
```

> The second `NEXT` passes these two rows as a whole into a query the aggregates them into a single row, which is the result of the `CALL` subquery.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The second `NEXT` passes these two rows as a whole to a query that aggregates them into a single row, which is the result of the `CALL` subquery.
```

For example, `RETURN 1` and `RETURN 1 + 1` cannot precede `NEXT`, but `RETURN 1 AS one` and `RETURN 1 + 1 AS two` can.
====

Variables which are local to the query preceding `NEXT` and which are not explicitly returned as part of the result of that query are not accessible by subsequent queries in the context of `NEXT`.
This allows you to control variable scope similarly to what you can do with `WITH`, see xref:clauses/with.adoc#variable-scope[Control variables in scope].

> [[aggregation-after-next]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role=label--new-2025.08]
[[aggregation-after-next]]
```

Reviewer 2: Is this new for 2025.08? The query is already in the published docs.

== Aggregation after `NEXT`

`NEXT` passes the result table as a whole to the subsequent query.
This is particularly useful when aggregating values.

In the following example, `NEXT` passes the variable `customer` to the second query:

.Aggregation after `NEXT`

> tag::sequential_queries_aggregation_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::sequential_queries_aggregation[]
```

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
RETURN c AS customer, p AS product

NEXT

RETURN product.name AS product,
       COUNT(customer) AS numberOfCustomers
----

> end::sequential_queries_aggregation_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// end::sequential_queries_aggregation[]
```

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| product | numberOfCustomers

| "Laptop"    | 4
| "Chocolate" | 3
| "Headphones"| 3
| "Coffee"    | 3
| "Phone"     | 1

2+d|Rows: 5
|===

[[next-and-union]]
== Interactions with `UNION` queries

[[union-after-next]]
=== Using `UNION` after `NEXT`

> If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` the full table of intermediate results is passed into all arms of the `UNION` query.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` the full table of intermediate results is passed into all branches of the `UNION` query.
```

.`UNION` after `NEXT`

> tag::sequential_queries_union_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::sequential_queries_union[]
```

[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(p:Product)
RETURN c, p

NEXT

> RETURN c.firstName AS name, COLLECT(p.price * c.discount) AS purchases, "discounted price" AS type

Reviewer: while not technically wrong, i think the discount is calculated incorrectly on a conceptual level -
shouldn't it be (1 - c.discount) ? for example, hannah's laptop is at a discounted price of 37.5 (down from 250)

stumbled upon this just now while trying to understand the testing error

Reviewer 3: I think you are right.

Reviewer 3: Should be fixed.

UNION
RETURN c.firstName AS name, COLLECT(p.price) AS purchases, "real price" AS type

NEXT

RETURN * ORDER BY name, type
----

> end::sequential_queries_union_example[]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// end::sequential_queries_union[]
```

| "Yusuf"  | [1000, 5]           | real price

3+d|Rows: 14
|===

[[union-before-next]]
=== Using `UNION` before `NEXT`

If a `UNION` query precedes a `NEXT` the full result of the `UNION` is passed to the subsequent query.

.`UNION` before `NEXT`
[source,cypher]
----
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product{name: "Laptop"})
RETURN c.firstName AS customer
UNION ALL
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]-> (:Product{name: "Coffee"})
RETURN c.firstName AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer AS customer, count(customer) as numberOfProducts
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="2*<m"]
|===
| customer | numberOfProducts

| "Amir"   | 1
| "Mateo"  | 2
| "Leila"  | 1
| "Yusuf"  | 1
| "Hannah" | 1
| "Niko"   | 1

2+d|Rows: 6
|===

In this example, the list of customer names from the first segment has a duplicate entry for "Mateo" who bought both a laptop and coffee.
The use of `UNION ALL` added him to the list twice.
The second segment can access the list, because both parts of the `UNION` return a part of the list, aliased as `customer`.
By using xref:functions/aggregating.adoc#functions-count[`count()`], the list aggregates the duplicate in the `RETURN` part of the query.

> [[next-inside-union]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role=label--new-2025.08]
[[next-inside-union]]
```

=== `NEXT` inside a `UNION` using `{}`

If a `UNION` query has a `NEXT` in any of its blocks, it is necessary to wrap that block with `{}`.

.`NEXT` inside `UNION`
[source,cypher]
----
{
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Chocolate'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer.firstName AS plantCustomer
}

UNION ALL

{
MATCH (c:Customer)-[:BUYS]->(:Product {name: 'Coffee'})
RETURN c AS customer

NEXT

RETURN customer.firstName AS plantCustomer
}
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*<m"]
|===
| plantCustomer

| "Amir"
| "Mateo"
| "Yusuf"
| "Mateo"
| "Hannah"
| "Niko"

1+d|Rows: 6
|===

> [[next-and-call]]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[role=label--new-2025.08]
[[next-and-call]]
```

Reviewer 2: Same here - this isnt new for 2025.08?

[[next-and-conditional-queries]]
== Interactions with conditional queries

[[conditional-queries-inside-next]]

> === Using conditional query before or after `NEXT`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
=== Using conditional queries before or after `NEXT`
```

> Conditional queries act similar to `CALL` by processing the incoming table of intermediate result row-by-row.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Conditional queries act similar to `CALL` by processing the incoming table of intermediate result row by row.
```

[[next-and-conditional-queries]]
== Interactions with conditional queries

[[conditional-queries-inside-next]]
=== Using conditional queries before or after `NEXT`

Conditional queries act similar to `CALL` by processing the incoming table of intermediate result row by row.
A conditional query following a `NEXT` acts equivalent to a conditional query wrapped in a `CALL` subquery.

.Conditional query inside `NEXT`

> [source,cypher]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::sequential_queries_chaining_conditional_queries[]
[source,cypher]
```

Reviewer 3: This one, I think, I removed. I thought it is fairly long and we probably do not want to have to many examples in the cheat sheet. The cheat sheet is supposed to be compact thing, I am assuming. But I have no idea what your general guidelines for that is. Hence, I am not strongly opinionated either way. Just explaining my thinking.

So, if you like to include another query in the cheat sheet, this one is a good choice.

Reviewer: let's keep this one

1+d|Rows: 6
|===

> === Leveraging by-table semantics using `UNION` after `NEXT`

Reviewer: ```suggestion

=== Leveraging by-table semantics using `UNION` after `NEXT`

```
(spacing only)

Reviewer 3: This heading is the first mention of "by-table semantics". It falls out of the sky. I think, the much earlier section "Passing values to subsequent queries", which current is without change, should make clear that `NEXT` passes the whole table of intermediate results to the subsequent query. Maybe even show a second example with aggregation.

On the more general level, the page currently reflects the journey we as implementor went through. But it should not — users do not care about our troubles, which meaningless to them. 

**The page should be present NEXT as the feature that allows to pass the whole table of intermediate result to a subsequent query.**

So the effects and benefits of that should come first — instead of in the last section.

So, consider to adjust the order of the section to this:

1. Passing values to subsequent queries
2. Interactions with UNION queries
3. Interactions with CALL subqueries
4. Interactions with conditional queries

In the latter two section, it should be explicitly pointed out respectively that CALL and conditionals only pass individual rows.

The text in "Interactions with CALL subqueries" also need some adjustment. For instance "`NEXT` can serve as a more readable alternative to CALL subqueries." Not sure we need to hang it this high now. Maybe it is better to show example where CALL nests NEXT and vice verse to illustrate the combined effect of their by-row and by-table semantics.

> If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` in any of its blocks, it will pass the full working table into all arms of the `UNION` query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` in any of its blocks, it passes the full working table into all arms of the `UNION` query.
```

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
If a `UNION` query follows a `NEXT` in any of its blocks, it passer the full table of intermediate results into all arms of the `UNION` query.
```

[[next-unsupported-behavior]]

> == Known limitations

Reviewer: are all limitations gone?

Reviewer 3: Yes. It was a very short intermediate state, where we errored on the cases that are now implemented. (Before these cases produced wrong results.)

ELSE
  RETURN customer, personalities[0] AS personality

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
// end::sequential_queries_chaining_conditional_queries[]
```

The third segment aggregates the personality types.
Finally, the fourth segment is another conditional query which subsumes multiple base personality types, if present, to a new personality.

[[next-inside-conditional-queries]]
=== `NEXT` inside a conditional query using `{}`

If a conditional query has a `NEXT` in any of its `THEN` or `ELSE` blocks, it is necessary to wrap the part after `THEN` or `ELSE` with `{}`.

.`NEXT` inside conditional query

> [source,cypher]

Reviewer: ```suggestion
// tag::sequential_queries_in_conditional_queries[]
[source,cypher]
```

Reviewer 3: This one I find less interesting for a cheat sheet. But again it is always relative to the space we are willing to spent, which I do not have baseline for.

Reviewer: let's remove this one then

  RETURN customer.firstName AS customer, "club below 1000" AS customerType, finalSum AS sum
}

> ----

Reviewer: ```suggestion
----
// end::sequential_queries_in_conditional_queries[]
```

The query above calculates the total price of products purchased per customer and then only applies the customer discount to sums below 1000.

> [[next-aggregations-in-union-and-call]]
> == `NEXT` and aggregations in the context of `UNION` and `CALL`

Reviewer 2: I think we should handle it like this (i.e. replace this section with the suggested table)
Now that we know 2025.06 was a bug, there is no point giving query examples etc. 

```suggestion
[[issues-fixes]]
== Known issues and fixes

`NEXT` initially did not correctly handle aggregations in the context of `UNION` branches and `CALL` subqueries.
As of Neo4j 2025.08, this issue has been fixed.
The table below summarizes the behavior changes across versions.

[[%header,cols="a,5a"]
|===
| Neo4j version 
| Behavior

| 2025.06
| `NEXT` yields incorrect results when using aggregations in the context of `UNION` branches and `CALL` subqueries.

| 2025.07
| Using aggregations with `NEXT` in the context of `UNION` branches and `CALL` subqueries throws an error.

| 2025.08+
| `NEXT` correctly supports aggregations in the context of `UNION` branches and `CALL` subqueries.  
See above for more details.
|===
```
